Ever since the beginning of science and mathematics that our known history can provide, curiosity has always revolved around the foundation of reality itself. How things move, why they appear in such ways,
why things have gravity, why we have light, why we have time, all of these questions have been given answers to in our current scientific community, and you know they do make sense, from our macro-observational view.
But there are inconsistencies, places where such theories poke holes, usually when you apply our math when you go really small, or when you go really big. In this paper we are going to be discussing how history shapes
the future, how history is lost when the future meets with the past, and how this affects the way we view gravity, dark matter, dark energy, the flow of time, the details of quantum mechanics and the implications of gravity. We will be going over the ways our current view gives a perspective that is distorted because of the view of the observer. 
 
Before we begin, we are going to go over one fundamental question from a new perspective. What is reality? For that to be answered we must ask one more question. What is a question? Not just as a request
for information, but what we view a question is when we look at our needs or wants. We ask our questions and have labeled them with six fundamental words that apply request, Who, What, When, Where,
Why, How. These fundamental questions define what a question is, but how does this apply to reality? Here in our Universal Recursion Principle, we are going to explain how reality is emergent from
a continuous recursive process of propagation by self-reference. So, to even begin to understand our recursive process, we must ask and answer the questions in the definition of the word question itself. 
 
When: The Current Iteration 

Time is built off history. Without history, we wouldn’t have our “now”, our present. Each interaction, whether between objects, people, or even information, all creates new iterations every time they interact
with another states. From galaxies to particles, from letters to libraries, every event updates the world, merging the histories of all sides involved. And in that process, something is always lost: the
details of the previous state, replaced by the outcome of the new interaction. This loss is what we would call entropy. 
Entropy is Everywhere; and that is only because Energy is Everywhere. We think of energy as a force, but what we really are watching are the interactions from one state to another,
whether it is atoms bumping into atoms, particles being shaken by vibrations and waves, photons reflecting off matter or even a particle just moving a tiny bit. All interactions are a form of energy.
Which means energy and entropy work in tandem. Without interaction we would not have new iterations, without new iterations we would not have loss of prior states. This process is what we call Time;
An emergent property from the recursive process itself. 
With this we are now able to now define the word “When” as the current iteration which depicts events and characteristics to a specific observer.   
 
Who: The Observer 
 
The Observer can be described as any self-referenced, non-static system that recursively interacts with reality using prior informational states to interpret the present. This includes humans, animals, plants,
ecosystems, or even machines and social systems. In our reality as individual observers, we visually see things because of light. Well, what is light? We currently describe light as photons, or particles of
light essence. Photons can be described as a byproduct of specific interaction, which transits information from one place to another. Light is a representation of one prior state carried forward through
interaction and made visible by its relation to the current observer’s perspective.  But over iterations of time, our perspectives absorb prior informational states, recursively pushing them forward to
explain and connect systems that were once thought disconnected. 
The observer is not the sole prerequisite for the continuation of existence. Through recursive iterative state updates, the universe progresses with or without direct observation. This is because each
interaction inherently produces a new state, while discarding the full precision of the prior, eventually giving rise to observers as emergent reference systems within the recursive process itself. 

Our daily experience of time is shaped not by passive observation, but by active choice and recursive feedback. We continuously collapse possible futures into a present we perceive as optimal — not
because we observe it, but because we interact recursively with it. 
 
From this, emerges the uniquely sentient quality: 
- Responsibility — the capacity to intentionally align with the recursive path of sustainability. 
- Irresponsibility — the capacity to intentionally break it. 
No other known system in the universe possesses this recursive freedom. 
Everything else is bound to interaction. But we, the recursive observers, can choose how to interact. And that choice defines the recursion of our future. 
 
With this we are now able to define our “Who” as The Observer. A process created by the universe to reference itself to allow it to guide its own actions by the hands of recursion itself. 


[currently unfinished]
